---
layout: post
title:  "About Variance"
date:   2020-02-12 08:02:48 -0500
brief: 
---

Variance is a topic that may be pretty confusing at first and wich results from introducing subtyping into a programming language. The whole question asked by Variance is simple though. Given a type `A` and its subtype `B`, can one be safely substituted for the other without affecting the program correctness? John De Goes made recently two [Spartan](https://www.patreon.com/jdegoes) sessions about this topic, and we will cover some of the thoughts he shared during these.

## Subtype 101

When talking about Variance, it's important to understand the meaning of the word _subtype_. Too often, we think about subtyping in terms of inheritance. In other words, if `B` inherits from `A` then `B` is a subtype of `A`. Subtyping is actually more about how compatible two types are. As described by the [Liskov Substitution Principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liskov_substitution_principle), a type `B` is a subtype of `A`, if `B` can be used when `A` is expected without affecting the program's correctness.
```scala
class A
class B extends A

val a: A = new B
val b: B = new A
           ^
error: type mismatch;
 found   : A
 required: B
```
`B` can be used wherever an `A` is expected but not the other way around. This is because `B` provides as much capabilities/guarantees than `A` but not vice-versa. We therefore say that `B` is a subtype of `A`. The question asked by variance is therefore whether or not this property is held when `A` and `B` are used to define more complex types (eg. `List[A]`, `A => B`, ...).

## Variance 101

There are overall three types of variance:
- **invariance**    : `A >: B` does not imply that `Foo[A] >: Foo[B]`
- **covariance**    : `A >: B` implies that `Foo[A] >: Foo[B]`
- **contravariance**: `A >: B` implies that `Foo[A] <: Foo[B]`

In Scala, we use the `+` sign to mark a type as **covariant**, the `-` to mark it as **contravariant** and no sign to mark it as **invariant**. Concretely:
```scala
// A :> B does not imply F[A] :> F[B] nor F[A] <: F[B]
class Invariant[T]
val ia: Invariant[A] = new Invariant[A]
val ib: Invariant[B] = ia // ERROR

// A :> B implies F[A] :> F[B]
trait Covariant[+T]
val covb: Covariant[B] = new Covariant[B]
val covb: Covariant[A] = covb // OK

// A :> B implies F[A] <: F[B]
trait Contravariant[-T]
val cona: Contravariant[A] = new Contravariant[A]
val conb: Contravariant[B] = cona // OK
```

## Substitution rule

One good way to think about variance is to look at the substitution process this way:
```scala
val fl: Foo[L] = new Foo[R] // the `=` stands for "can be substituted by"
```
- **invariance**: does not allow any substitution so `R` must equal `L` (`L =:= R`)
- **covariance**: allows one only if `R` is **more** specialized (+) than `L` (`L :> R`)
- **contravariance** allows one only if `R` is **less** specialized (-) than `L` (`L <: R`)

In other words, the general substitution rule is as follow:
- when types are **covariant**, `L` has to be a **supertype** of `R`
- when types are **contravariant**, `L` has to be a **subtype** of `R`.

## Variance and functions

When it comes to variance, functions are a pretty interesting case. As you may know, functions in Scala are defined using particular traits such as the one below:
```scala
trait Function1[-T, +R] {
  def apply(t: T): R
}
```
A function is therefore **contravariant in its arguments** and **covariant in its result**:
```scala
val f1: Function1[L1, R0] = new Function1[L0, R1] { /* ... */ }
```
If we apply the general substitution rule mentioned earlier, we conclude that `L1 <: L0` and `R0 >: R1`. In other words, the function on the left has to:
- take a **more** specialized type as an argument (**contravariance**)
- and/or return a **less** specialized type (**covariance**)

`L0 => R1` is therefore a subtype of `L1 => R0`.

## Variance position

Once you start introducing variance, you necessarily end up with conflicts and pretty confusing error messages. The main rule here is that once a type has been marked as covariant or contravariant, it cannot be used in a position requiring the opposite variance:
```scala
trait Foo[+T] {
  // functions are contravariant in their argument
  def foo(t: T): Unit
  // error: covariant type T occurs in contravariant 
  // position in type T of value t
}

trait Bar[-U] {
  // functions are covariant in their result
  def bar(): U
  // error contravariant type T occurs in covariant 
  // position in type (t: T)T of method bar
}
```
The compiler prevents us from doing this in order to enforce subtyping rules and guarantee correctness at runtime. In some cases, we may still however need to use a type parameter at different positions. This can be done but under some restrictions.

In the first case, `T` is covariant and cannot be used as a function argument. We can however use an appropriate substitute for `foo` that satifies the requirements for contravariance. Remember that _when types are **covariant** `L` has to be a **supertype** of `R`_. 
```scala
val fl: Function1[L, Unit] = new Function1[R, Unit]
```
So a valid substitute for `foo` would be `T1 => Unit` with `T1 >: T`. This gives us:
```scala
trait Foo[+T] {
  def foo[T1 >: T](t: T1): Unit
}
```
Similarly in the second case, `T` is contravariant and cannot be used as a function result. In order to satisfy the requirements for covariance, we need to remember that _when types are **contravariant**, `L` has to be a **subtype** of `R`_
```scala
val fl: Function1[L, Unit] = new Function1[R, Unit]
```
So a valid substitute for `foo` would be `T0 => Unit` with `T0 <: T`. This gives us:
```scala
trait Foo[-T] {
  def foo[T0 <: T](t: T0): Unit
}
```

To convince yourself, let's think about what you would be allowed to do if variance errors would not be caught at compile time:
```scala
class A
class B0 extends A
class B1 extends A

trait Foo[+T] {
  // Assume this compiles
  def foo(t: T): Unit
}

val fb0: Foo[B0] = new Foo[B0] { def foo(b0: B0): Unit = ??? }
// Because `Foo[_]` is covariant in `T`
val fba: Foo[A] = fb0

// This will crash the program at runtime
// as `fba` can only accept `B0`s
fba.foo(new B1)

trait Bar[-U] {
  // Assume this compiles
  def bar(): U
}

val ba:  Bar[A] = new Bar[A] { def bar(): A = new B0 }
// Because `Bar[_]` is contravariant in `U`
val bb1: Bar[B1] = ba

// This will crash the program at runtime
// as `bb1` can only produce `B1`s
val b1: B1 = ba.bar()
```

## Variance flipping

As if variance was not enough complicated, you would probably surprised that a type's variance can also flip depending on the context.
```scala
trait Foo[-A] {
  def foo(fa: Foo[A]): Unit
  /* contravariant type A occurs in covariant 
     position in type Foo[A] of value fa */
}
```
Despite `fa` being a function argument and `A` marked as contravariant, the compiler complains about `A` being used in a covariant position. To understand why this is happening, let's look at how `A`'s variance is calculated in `foo`. `A` is first defined as contravariant:
```scala
def foo(fa: Foo[(-A)]): Unit
```
but because it is used to define a function argument, it is also marked contravariant by `foo`.
```scala
def foo(fa: Foo[-(-A)]): Unit
```
In other words, `A` is marked contravariant twice in `foo` which makes it covariant at that position, hence the compilation error:
```scala
def foo(fa: Foo[+A]): Unit
```
The takeaway here is that a type parameter variance can flip depending on its position. This is actually described in the [specification of the Scala language](https://www.scala-lang.org/files/archive/spec/2.11/04-basic-declarations-and-definitions.html#variance-annotations). So whenever you get into this kind of issue, apply the same reasoning that we have just described.

## Recap

Variance is a complicated topic but it does not need to be. Its main purpose is to provide us with **typesafe substitution** but also with **improved type inference**:
```scala
class Animal
class Zebra extends Animal
// thanks to covariance
val animal: Animal = new Zebra

class Hotel[-T]
def generic = new Hotel[Any]
// thanks to contravariance
val ah: Hotel[A] = generic
```

Secondly, one may wonder how to remember what should be **covariant** or **contravariant**. A good mnemonic is to keep in mind that whatever is **produced** by a class should be marked as **covariant** while anything **consumed** by a class should be **contravariant**. In case of conflict, fall back on the [substitution rule](#Substitution-rule).

Special thanks To [Calvin](https://github.com/calvinlfer), [John](https://github.com/jdegoes) and [Adam](https://github.com/adamgfraser) for their help writing this post.

## References

- [Checking-variance-annotations](http://mbonaci.github.io/scala/#433---checking-variance-annotations)
- [Liskov Substitution Principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liskov_substitution_principle)
- [Specification of the Scala language](https://www.scala-lang.org/files/archive/spec/2.11/04-basic-declarations-and-definitions.html#variance-annotations)